Changelog for v0.9 (#665)
eclipse-qrisp/Qrisp: documentation/source/general/changelog/0.9.rst

as the primary tool for matrix inversion and singular value processing to operators that
aren't necessarily Hermitian. The :ref:`BlockEncoding <BlockEncoding>` class gains the
following new methods:
 
* :func:`svt <qrisp.block_encodings.BlockEncoding.svt>`: Applies a polynomial to the
  singular values of a block-encoded operator, supporting both even and odd parity
  polynomials in either the Chebyshev or Polynomial basis.
* :func:`pseudo_inv <qrisp.block_encodings.BlockEncoding.pseudo_inv>`: Using Quantum
  Singular Value Transform, this function returns a block encoding that approximates
  the threshold pseudoinverse by ignoring singular values below a specific limit to
  regularize ill-conditioned linear systems. 
* :func:`inv <qrisp.block_encodings.BlockEncoding.inv>` now uses QSVT by default,
  succeeding the previous Hermitianization-based GQSVT (Generalized QSVT) approach. 
  A ``method`` keyword lets you switch between QSVT, GQSVT, or
  QET (Quantum Eigenvalue Transform) as needed.
* :func:`dagger <qrisp.block_encodings.BlockEncoding.dagger>`: Returns the adjoint of a
  block-encoded operator.

>  

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The :ref:`BlockEncoding <BlockEncoding>` class gains the following new constructors:

* :func:`from_eye <qrisp.block_encodings.BlockEncoding.from_eye>`: Constructs a
  BlockEncoding of a 2-D array with ones on a specified diagonal and zeros elsewhere.
  A positive ``diagonal_index`` selects an upper subdiagonal, a negative value a lower
  subdiagonal, and 0 (the default) the main diagonal.
* :func:`from_projector <qrisp.block_encodings.BlockEncoding.from_projector>`:
  Constructs a BlockEncoding of the projector :math:`|\phi\rangle\langle\psi|`, or,
  when ``kernel=True``, of the kernel projector :math:`\mathbb{I} - |\phi\rangle\langle\phi|`.
  Both left and right states may be specified as integers (computational basis states)
  or as arbitrary state-preparation callables.
* :func:`from_foqcs_lcu_operator <qrisp.block_encodings.BlockEncoding.from_foqcs_lcu_operator>`:
  Constructs a BlockEncoding from a :class:`QubitOperator` using the
  Fast One-Qubit-Controlled Select LCU (FOQCS-LCU) algorithm. The operator is
  analyzed automatically and the appropriate PREP subroutine — Heisenberg or
  spin-glass — is selected. Supported operators include arbitrary one-body fields
  and same-axis two-body couplings of the form :math:`P_i P_j` with
  :math:`P \in \{X, Y, Z\}`.
* :func:`from_foqcs_lcu_prep <qrisp.block_encodings.BlockEncoding.from_foqcs_lcu_prep>`:
  Low-level FOQCS-LCU constructor for users who supply their own right and left
  PREP subroutines (:math:`P_R` and :math:`P_L`), enabling custom FOQCS-LCU
  block encodings beyond the built-in Heisenberg and spin-glass models.

*In addition,* :func:`from_lcu <qrisp.block_encodings.BlockEncoding.from_lcu>`
  now supports general complex coefficients 
  (previously, only real non-negative coefficients were supported).

```

<qrisp.typing.ClbitLike>`, :class:`FloatLike <qrisp.typing.FloatLike>` (replacing
``Param``), :class:`ScalarLike <qrisp.typing.ScalarLike>`, :class:`NDArrayLike
<qrisp.typing.NDArrayLike>`, and :class:`ArrayLike <qrisp.typing.ArrayLike>`.

**Other improvements**: MLIR / xDSL dialect (`PR #465 <https://github.com/eclipse-qrisp/Qrisp/pull/465>`_); StableHLO lowering (`PR #577 <https://github.com/eclipse-qrisp/Qrisp/pull/577>`_);
composite gate interpreter (`PR #593 <https://github.com/eclipse-qrisp/Qrisp/pull/593>`_); ``BoundQubitTerm``/``BoundQubitOperator`` removed
(`PR #559 <https://github.com/eclipse-qrisp/Qrisp/pull/559>`_); ``QubitOperator._to_pauli_dict()`` and zero-multiplication fix (`PR #612 <https://github.com/eclipse-qrisp/Qrisp/pull/612>`_);
MaxCut module refactored (`PR #542 <https://github.com/eclipse-qrisp/Qrisp/pull/542>`_); benchmarking callback threshold (`PR #505 <https://github.com/eclipse-qrisp/Qrisp/pull/505>`_); depth
metric negative slicing (`PR #451 <https://github.com/eclipse-qrisp/Qrisp/pull/451>`_); IQM backend domain update (`PR #561 <https://github.com/eclipse-qrisp/Qrisp/pull/561>`_); controlled-U3

> compilation fixes (`PR #551 <https://github.com/eclipse-qrisp/Qrisp/pull/551>`_); Gast dependency added (`PR #474 <https://github.com/eclipse-qrisp/Qrisp/pull/474>`_); Catalyst 0.15

Reviewer: Actually, we can remove the gast dependency. We added it temporarily, because `pennylane` relies on `gast`. But they did not have it as a dependency, but relied on. another package that had the `gast` dependency. Then this other packed removed their `gast` dependency, which cause our pipeline to fail b because `pennylane` lacked the explicit `gast` dependency. This dependency was added in a subsequent `pennylane` update.

Tl;dr: We should remove the explicit `gast` dependency.

* **``fuse_adjacents`` now runs as part of the PassManager chain** alongside the
  other built-in passes; the standalone function still works as before.
* **``Param`` type alias renamed to ``FloatLike``** and moved into ``qrisp.typing``.
* **``BoundQubitTerm`` and ``BoundQubitOperator`` removed**; use ``QubitTerm`` /
  ``QubitOperator`` instead.
* **``unbalanced_W_state`` renamed to ``unbalanced_w_state``** (lowercase ``w``).
* **``quake_lowering`` directory removed**.
* The old ``qunicorn``-based ``BackendClient``/``BackendServer`` network
  infrastructure and the Docker-based backends have been removed.
* New :func:`convert_to_cirq <qrisp.interface.convert_to_cirq>` and
  :func:`convert_from_cirq <qrisp.interface.convert_from_cirq>` functions for
  bidirectional Qrisp-Cirq conversion (PR #610).
* **``jrange`` ``step`` argument removed** (PR #652): Passing three arguments to
  :func:`jrange <qrisp.jasp.jrange>` now emits a ``QrispDeprecationWarning`` and raises
  a ``TypeError``. Use a step-1 loop and multiply the loop variable by the desired step.
* New optional ``xdsl`` and ``catalyst`` dependency groups in ``pyproject.toml`` (PR #664).

> * Jax 0.5.x and Catalyst 0.15 compatibility.

Reviewer: Qrisp requires jax 0.7.1 which did not change form  qrisp 0.8.

Author: Yes, but my localy environment was somehow using the earlier version. Which is why it showed up here. I have now rebased the PR which takes the pinned dependencies into consideration. So, no need for this.

.. _v0.9:

Qrisp 0.9
=========

> A redesigned **backend interface** anchors Qrisp 0.9, alongside the **Quantum

Reviewer 2: I'd say that @renezander90's implementation of the Dalzell linear solver should be highlighted here way more than QSVT (:

Author: Feel free to rewrite it :)

Reviewer: QSVT is the more general and well-known primitive. The linear solver should not be highlighted more than QSVT, but it could deserve some highlighting :).

  Constructs a BlockEncoding from a :class:`QubitOperator` using the
  Fast One-Qubit-Controlled Select LCU (FOQCS-LCU) algorithm. The operator is
  analyzed automatically and the appropriate PREP subroutine — Heisenberg or
  spin-glass — is selected. Supported operators include arbitrary one-body fields
  and same-axis two-body couplings of the form :math:`P_i P_j` with
  :math:`P \in \{X, Y, Z\}`.
* :func:`from_foqcs_lcu_prep <qrisp.block_encodings.BlockEncoding.from_foqcs_lcu_prep>`:
  Low-level FOQCS-LCU constructor for users who supply their own right and left
  PREP subroutines (:math:`P_R` and :math:`P_L`), enabling custom FOQCS-LCU
  block encodings beyond the built-in Heisenberg and spin-glass models.

*In addition,* :func:`from_lcu <qrisp.block_encodings.BlockEncoding.from_lcu>`
  now supports general complex coefficients 
  (previously, only real non-negative coefficients were supported).

GQSVT, introduced in PR #479, is available as one of the three methods on
:func:`inv <qrisp.block_encodings.BlockEncoding.inv>` (``method="GQSVT"``), giving you
a Hermitianization-based fallback for cases where QET's Hermitian-only restriction

> doesn't apply. Two further standalone functions round out the ``qrisp.gqsp`` module:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* :func:`QSVT <qrisp.algorithms.gqsp.qsvt.QSVT>` and :func:`GQSVT <qrisp.algorithms.gqsp.gqsvt.GQSVT>` perform (Gerneralized) Quantum Singular Value Transform for fixed parity real or complex polynomials, respectively.
Two further standalone functions round out the ``qrisp.gqsp`` module:
```

> :func:`dalzell_inversion <qrisp.gqsp.dalzell_inversion>`, Qrisp's implementation of

Reviewer 2: imo this is the star of the update when it comes to block encodings

Author: Feel free to rewrite this as well. :)

* **``fuse_adjacents`` now runs as part of the PassManager chain** alongside the
  other built-in passes; the standalone function still works as before.
* **``Param`` type alias renamed to ``FloatLike``** and moved into ``qrisp.typing``.
* **``BoundQubitTerm`` and ``BoundQubitOperator`` removed**; use ``QubitTerm`` /
  ``QubitOperator`` instead.
* **``unbalanced_W_state`` renamed to ``unbalanced_w_state``** (lowercase ``w``).
* **``quake_lowering`` directory removed**.
* The old ``qunicorn``-based ``BackendClient``/``BackendServer`` network
  infrastructure and the Docker-based backends have been removed.
* New :func:`convert_to_cirq <qrisp.interface.convert_to_cirq>` and
  :func:`convert_from_cirq <qrisp.interface.convert_from_cirq>` functions for
  bidirectional Qrisp-Cirq conversion (PR #610).
* **``jrange`` ``step`` argument removed** (PR #652): Passing three arguments to
  :func:`jrange <qrisp.jasp.jrange>` now emits a ``QrispDeprecationWarning`` and raises
  a ``TypeError``. Use a step-1 loop and multiply the loop variable by the desired step.
* New optional ``xdsl`` and ``catalyst`` dependency groups in ``pyproject.toml`` (PR #664).

> * Jax 0.5.x and Catalyst 0.15 compatibility.

Reviewer: Qrisp requieres Jax 0.7.1

Author: Yes, this was written before the dependency groups PR was merged.

element-wise logical operations (``and``, ``or``, ``xor``), and reductions via
:meth:`all() <qrisp.QuantumArray.all>` / :meth:`any() <qrisp.QuantumArray.any>`.

**Arithmetic enhancements**: Gidney adder refactored
(`PR #473 <https://github.com/eclipse-qrisp/Qrisp/pull/473>`_) with ``c_in``/``c_out``
support; Cuccaro adder gains matching ``c_in``/``c_out`` interface
(`PR #615 <https://github.com/eclipse-qrisp/Qrisp/pull/615>`_); new
``gidney_cq_venting_adder`` for carry-venting classical-quantum addition
(`PR #537 <https://github.com/eclipse-qrisp/Qrisp/pull/537>`_);
BigInteger Montgomery arithmetic fixes and rebuilt QuantumModulus constructor
(`PR #495 <https://github.com/eclipse-qrisp/Qrisp/pull/495>`_).

**Typing module** (`PR #543 <https://github.com/eclipse-qrisp/Qrisp/pull/543>`_):
New :mod:`qrisp.typing <qrisp.typing>` module with
:class:`QubitLike <qrisp.typing.QubitLike>`, :class:`ClbitLike
<qrisp.typing.ClbitLike>`, :class:`FloatLike <qrisp.typing.FloatLike>` (replacing
``Param``), :class:`ScalarLike <qrisp.typing.ScalarLike>`, :class:`NDArrayLike
<qrisp.typing.NDArrayLike>`, and :class:`ArrayLike <qrisp.typing.ArrayLike>`.

> **Other improvements**: MLIR / xDSL dialect

Reviewer 3: The `QuantumCircuit` class has been refactored almost entirely:
- https://github.com/eclipse-qrisp/Qrisp/pull/461
- https://github.com/eclipse-qrisp/Qrisp/pull/486
- https://github.com/eclipse-qrisp/Qrisp/pull/489
- https://github.com/eclipse-qrisp/Qrisp/pull/526
